Lampreys are peculiar creatures that have ==changing== sex ratios. In food-rich environments, lamprey populations exhibit approximately 78% males, decreasing in more resource-scarce settings. In this paper, we present **a model describing the migration of lampreys between environments with different food abundance** and **models describing the effects of lampreys on hosts**, and predict lamprey survival by varying the sex ratio in the models. Our model explains well why lampreys have evolved variable sex ratios. We further modelled the relationship between lamprey sex ratios and the larger ecosystem, and analysed the effects of lamprey sex ratios on ecosystem stability and on other species.

In TASK 1, we established the logical chain of sex ratio affecting the ecosystem indirectly, through the growth of its parasitic juvenile density. We developed a model based on the population growth, survival and metamorphosis rate of lamprey, and the number of lamprey attacks and survival rate of the host species, calculating the effect of sex ratio toward the relative mortality of hosts in the ecosystem.

In TASK 2, we built a hypothetical environment consisting a resource-rich lake and a resource-poor lake adjacent to each other. Lampreys can migrate between the two environments with a certain probability. By setting different sex ratios at birth in the two environments, we found that the sex ratio of the most adapted environment corresponded to the actual situation. Models reflected the different impact of sex ratio on the lamprey population under different resource conditions, by the growth rate of the respective males and females in the two environments. We further analysed the model and proposed a hypothesis to explain the evolution of the lamprey's ability to alter sex ratios.


In TASK 3, based on the relationship between sex ratio and the relative mortality of hosts in the ecosystem obtained in Task 1, we built an index of species diversity by combining species richness and species evenness, and reflected the effect of sex on the stability of the ecosystem through the effect of sex on species diversity.


In TASK 4, we utilised normal distribution estimates, and calculated the 95\% confidence interval for the probability of parasite infestation. Subsequently, we distinguished between lamprey susceptible and non-susceptible parasite species. Further, we identified parasitic species that can take advantage from variable sex ratios in the lamprey population.


Finally, we performed sensitivity analyses on some key variables in the model to get a deeper understanding of the model and discuss the conclusions. We further provide the strengths and weaknesses of the model for future studies.